We are not done with the language basic series.
And with that, we have set a solid foundation towards mastering Java.
We mastered all the bare essentials in the process.
We also learned about ten or so effective job items.
Next, we will learn more serious object oriented programming.
We will learn concepts like inheritance, polymorphism, abstract classes and interfaces.
With that, we will have all the tools to write some awesome object oriented programs.
Let's now look at some of the topics we covered in this chapter.
Discuss final variables.
The term final simply implies that something cannot be changed.
That is, it is final.
So if a variables value should be final, that is, it shouldn't change once initialized.
Then it needs to be marked as final.
So final variable basically implies constant.
If it is used with a primitive variable, then the value can never be changed.
But recall that if it is used with a reference variable, then the reference is constant.
That is, the reference always points to the object initialized with and cannot be reassigned.
Another object.
However, contents of that object can be changed.
So you should keep that in mind.
Final variables do not get a default value.
And the reason for that is a final variable gets a default value and is initialized once again, let's
say in a constructor.
Then we are violating its core definition.
And final keyword can be used with any of the three kinds of variables that is instance local or static.
As part of final variables.
We also discussed about constant variables, which are a kind of final variables whose values are known
at compile time itself.
For this reason, they're usually also referred to as compile time constants.
And here is an example, which is variable pi from the math class.
Compile time constants will allow compilers to perform some optimization.
For example, here we have variable x which is assigned marked by but marked by is a compile time constant
and the compiler knows the corresponding value.
3.1 for.
Citizens 3.14 directly to the variable X and stores it in the class file as part of the byte code.
So this eliminates some overhead at runtime as JVM doesn't have to look into math class to make this
assignment.
So compiler is able to perform such an optimization.
And here are some restrictions for a final variable to be qualified as a constant variable.
First is obviously it needs to be declared with the modifier final.
Next.
The data type of variable should be either a parameter or a string.
If you have any other data type, then it will not be a constant variable.
So that's a very important point to remember.
Next variable must be initialized in the declaration statement itself.
That is, it cannot be initialized somewhere else, like in a constructor or in some initialize block.
Finally, the initialization expression itself must be a constant expression.
A constant expression is something whose value is known at compile time itself, and hence it is also
referred to as compile time constant expression.
There are some rules on what expressions qualify as constant expressions, but typically you will see
either primitive literals or string literals as constant expressions like in the case of Mad Dot by.
Next we looked at box primitives and then a related topic called auto boxing.
Auto Boxing, which was introduced in Java five, blurred the distinction between primitive types and
box primitives.
For example, box primitives could be directly assigned primitives, and similarly, primitives could
be directly assigned box primitives.
Also due to auto boxing promoters could be directly added to data structures like URLs, and this helped
in reducing verbosity.
However, one of the effective job items cautions us about some issues that we may run into if box primitives
are used carelessly.
We discuss the issues and have also tried them out in code.
Finally we looked at coding conventions, which are critical for writing clean and professional code.
We first looked at naming conventions and we discussed pretty much all the recommendations that were
suggested by item 56, which stresses on sticking to generally accepted naming conventions.
We discussed both typographical and grammatical naming recommendations, and we should try to follow
them as much as we can.
Next, we looked at conventions for how to structure our programs.
We said when designing our classes, we should follow the single responsibility principle, which simply
means that the class should have only one responsibility.
This would also limit the class size and more importantly, would help us create better abstractions.
That is, we will have loosely coupled classes.
Next with regards to methods, we should try to keep them very small and focused.
They should do only one thing and no more.
We also looked at one recommendation from effective Java, who suggestion was to minimize the scope
of local variables.
The item recommends to declare a local variable where it is first used.
It also recommends to use fun loops instead of loops, as four loops are better at minimizing the scope
of variables and help in preventing box.
Finally we looked at some conventions for writing comments.
Generally, comments should provide overviews of quote.
It is perfectly fine to describe any non-obvious design decisions.
But to avoid writing frequent comments.
And if you are being compelled to write frequent comments, then it means you may want to consider refactoring
some of the stuff.
Usually choose good descriptive method and variable names, and that should serve as documentation.
And that's about it.
We have set all the necessary foundations that we need and we can now move on to more advanced stuff.
Thanks for listening and I will see you in the next chapter.